+++
date = "2012-05-25T14:00:00"
title = "A Genome–Wide Association Study of Plaque Phenotypes in the Athero–Express Biobank Study"
abstract = ""
abstract_short = ""
event = "EAS 2012"
event_url = "https://www.eas-society.org/"
location = "Milan, Italy"

selected = false
math = true

url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""

# Optional featured image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
[header]
image = "headers/banner.jpg"
caption = "Image credit: [**Bereziuk Serhii**](https://www.shutterstock.com/g/bereziuk%20serhii)"

+++

**Sander W. van der Laan**<sup>1,2</sup>, Jessica van Setten<sup>3</sup>, Arjan H. Schoneveld<sup>2</sup>, Sander M. van de Weg<sup>2</sup>, Claudia Tersteeg<sup>2</sup>, Chaylendra Strijder<sup>2</sup>, Mirjam B. Smeets<sup>2</sup>, Folkert W. Asselbergs<sup>3,4</sup>, Jean-Paul de Vries<sup>5</sup>, Frans L. Moll<sup>5</sup>, Dominique P.V. de Kleijn<sup>1,2</sup>, Paul I.W. de Bakker<sup>3,6,7</sup>, Gerard Pasterkamp<sup>1,2</sup></br>
<sub><sup>1) Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 2) Experimental Cardiology Laboratory, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 3) Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 4) Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 5) Department of Vascular Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 6) Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts; 7) Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.<sub><sup>

**Aim** Recent genome–wide association studies have identified common variants associated with primary cardiovascular disease (CVD). CVD is often caused by atherosclerosis, an inflammatory disease characterized by the continuous process of plaque formation and progression, ultimately leading to a thrombotic event. The Athero-Express Biobank Study (AE) has focused on histological and proteomic analysis of plaques in relation to clinical outcome. We hypothesized that common variants are associated with histological plaque phenotypes. </br></br>
**Methods** This study was conducted within the realm of the AE, a multicenter, prospective cohort study of patients undergoing endarterectomy. DNA derived from 831 patients was extracted and genotyped using Affymetrix SNP 5.0. Cursory quality assurance and imputation left 713 patient samples and 2,597,692 SNPs. Plaque phenotypes include lipid, macrophages, smooth muscle cells, calcification and vessel density, and were analyzed within a linear regression model correcting for age, gender and principal components. An additive genetic model was assumed. Additionally a versatile gene–based association study (VEGAS) was performed and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software was used to identify pathways.</br></br>
**Results** Common variants were significantly associated with vessel density (p< 5x10<sup>-8</sup>), but not with hemorrhage although inflammatory plaque phenotypes were suggestively associated (p< 5x10<sup>-6</sup>). VEGAS and IPA identified various pathways associated with intracellular matrix maintenance, inflammation, and angiogenesis in relation to vessel density.</br></br>
**Conclusion** To our knowledge this is the first genome-wide scan involving plaque phenotypes. Further research should focus on finding the causal mechanisms leading to plaque vessel formation, as vessel density has been demonstrated to associate with secondary CVD.
