+++
date = "2014-10-18T14:00:00"
title = "Cystatin C and cardiovascular disease: a Mendelian randomization study"
abstract = ""
abstract_short = ""
event = "ASHG 2014"
event_url = "http://www.ashg.org/2014meeting/"
location = "San Diego (CA), United States of America"

selected = false
math = true

url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""

# Optional featured image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
[header]
image = "headers/banner.jpg"
caption = "Image credit: [**Bereziuk Serhii**](https://www.shutterstock.com/g/bereziuk%20serhii)"

+++

**S.W. van der Laan**<sup>1</sup>, T. Fall<sup>2</sup>, J. van Setten<sup>1,3</sup>, P.I.W. de Bakker<sup>3,4</sup>, G. Pasterkamp<sup>1</sup>, J. Ärnlöv<sup>2</sup>, M.V. Holmes<sup>5</sup>, F.W. Asselbergs<sup>3,6,7,8</sup> on behalf of the Cystatin C MR Consortium.</br>
<sub><sup>1) Experimental Cardiology, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 2) Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala Uni- versity, Uppsala, Sweden; 3) Department of Medical Genetics, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 4) Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 5) Penn Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Health System, United States of America; 6) Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, University College London, London, United Kingdom; 7) Durrer Center for Cardiogene- tic Research, ICIN-Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 8) Department of Cardiology, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.</sup></sub>

**Background** Observational studies show a strong dose-rsponse association between circulating Cystatin C (encoded by *CST3*) and incident coronary heart disease (CHD), independent of traditional risk factors and renal function. This supports the hypothesis that circulating Cystatin C could represent a causal factor for CHD. However, residual confounding and reverse causality could be alternative explanations that are difficult to tease from observational studies. We sought to investigate the causal role of Cystatin C in CHD development by conducting a Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis using a common variant in the *CST3* locus.</br></br>
**Methods** We conducted a MR analysis in 43 studies including 219,219 individuals with 37,321 measures of Cystatin C and 41,162 CHD events. We used rs911119 (or a proxy, r2>0.90) in the *CST3* locus (identified previously by GWAS) as a genetic instrument for MR analysis.</br></br>
**Results** Cystatin C associated with risk of CHD in an observational analysis adjusted for age and sex (odds ratio [OR] 2.20; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.90, 2.57 per doubling of Cystatin C concentration; p=8.87×10<sup>-31</sup>); additional adjustment for confounders (smoking, HDL-cholesterol, BMI, CKD-EPI, and systolic blood pressure) diminished the association (OR 1.60; 95%CI 1.34, 1.96 per doubling of Cystatin C concentration; p=9.09×10<sup>-7</sup>). Rs911119 had a strong effect on circulating Cystatin C levels (-0.061; 95%CI -0.066, -0.057; p=4.49×10<sup>-149</sup> per effect allele). However, the variant did not show significant association with risk of CHD (OR 1.01 (95%CI 0.99, 1.03; p=0.41).</br></br>
**Conclusion** In summary we replicated the association of Cystatin C with CHD risk and show a strong association of rs911119 with circulating Cystatin C. However, we find no evidence for a causal role of Cystatin C in the development of CHD.
