+++
date = "2014-05-31T14:00:00"
title = "Human Genetic Evidence that Common Variants near PIK3CG are Associated with Atherosclerotic Plaque Hemorrhage and Vessel Density"
abstract = ""
abstract_short = ""
event = "ESHG 2014"
event_url = "https://www.eshg.org/"
location = "Milan, Italy"

selected = false
math = true

url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""

# Optional featured image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
[header]
image = "headers/banner.jpg"
caption = "Image credit: [**Bereziuk Serhii**](https://www.shutterstock.com/g/bereziuk%20serhii)"

+++

**S.W. van der Laan**<sup>1</sup>, L. Folkersen<sup>2</sup>, J. van Setten<sup>1</sup>, A.H. Schoneveld<sup>1</sup>, S.M. van de Weg<sup>1</sup>, F.W. Asselbergs<sup>1</sup>, D.P.V. de Kleijn<sup>3,4</sup>, R. Malik<sup>5</sup>, M. Dichgans<sup>5</sup>, A. Gabrielsen<sup>2</sup>, P.I.W. de Bakker<sup>1,6,</sup> G. Pasterkamp<sup>1</sup></br>
<sub><sup>1) UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2) Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 3) Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4) National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 5) Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, München, Germany, 6) Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge (MA), United States of America.</sub></sup>

**Aim** Atherosclerotic plaques may vary among individuals, in part due to heritable factors. However, the genetic architecture of plaque phenotypes is largely unknown. A common variant near *PIK3CG* on 7q22.3 has previously been associated with carotid plaque presence. Animal models suggest that *PIK3CG* may play a role in plaque formation through neovascularization. We hypothesized that the *PIK3CG* variant is associated with intraplaque hemorrhage (IPH) and vessel density in human plaques. Secondarily we focused on characterizing the functional role of genetic variants near *PIK3CG* in advanced human atherosclerosis.</br></br>
**Methods** We collected 571 Athero-Express Biobank Study patients, and genotyped them using Affymetrix SNP 5.0. After quality control we tested rs17398575 for association to immunohistochemically scored IPH and vessel density, correcting for age, gender and 10 principal components. We used the BiKE cohort to assess the effect of *PIK3CG* variants on *PIK3CG* expression in circulating monocytes (n=95) and in carotid plaques (n=126). </br></br>
**Results** The reported *PIK3CG* variant, rs17398575 (risk allele A, frequency=0.72), was associated with IPH (OR=1.40 [1.10-1.69 95% CI], p=0.0271) and vessel density (β=0.095 [0.0415 s.e.m.], p=0.0221). The SNP dependent *PIK3CG* expression demonstrated a differential effect in the vascular wall (p=0.783 for rs17398575) compared to monocytes (p=0.0261 for rs17398575).</br></br>
**Conclusion** To our knowledge this is the first report involving the association of genetic variants to histological plaque phenotypes in humans. Further research should focus on replicating these results and elucidating the etiology of plaque vessel formation and intraplaque hemorrhage, as epidemiological studies demonstrated these associate with cardiovascular disease.
